
@setfilename copyright.info

Copyright @copyright{} 1991 Digital Equipment Corporation, Maynard, Massachusetts.

All Rights Reserved.

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted,
provided that the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that
both that copyright notice and this permission notice appear in
supporting documentation, and that the name of Digital not be
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
software without specific, written prior permission.

Digital disclaims all warranties with regard to this software, including
all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness.  In no event shall
Digital be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or
any damages whatsoever resulting from loss of use, data or profits,
whether in an action of contract, negligence or other tortious action,
arising out of or in connection with the use or performance of this
software.

Enhancements copyright @copyright{} 1992-2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007,
2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@format
Published by the Free Software Foundation
59 Temple Place - Suite 330
Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
@end format

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License,''
is included exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License,''
and this permission notice, may be included in translations approved by
the Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
